the saturn v rocket took humans to the
moon for the first time but the humans
didn't steer the rocket
it steered itself using a computer
a lot of the saturn v rocket was built
here in huntsville alabama otherwise
known as rocket city and one of the
really cool things about living here
is it's filled with aerospace and
computer engineers who love this stuff
so a thing you can actually do here is
pick up the phone and call one of your
friends
and have them call their friend and
before you know it you're in a parking
lot
receiving a saturn 5 memory module from
a guy you just met
and he just trusts that you're going to
give it back to him this is 14
kilobytes of data which is really
interesting because
the same day i got this i had linus
sebastian from linus tech tips here
we were installing a server that was
over 100
terabytes now millions of people look to
linus to understand
more about modern computing hardware so
i thought a really cool thing to do
would be stop what we were doing with
the server
and take a closer look at this memory
module and how it works
let's sit back and watch a modern
computer nerd learn
about the cutting edge technology from
the 1960s
i'm destined let's go get smarter every
day have you ever seen a saturn v rocket
no
okay do you know what the saturn v is
yes my daily
life literally revolves around the
saturn v like that's right that's the
saturn v
peeking out over the trees right there
oh there it is hello
in the 60s they had just started
building digital computers
and i'm going to show you the computer
that they used to to steer that thing
i mean it's got to be a bit of a
terrifying experience having like
you know the equivalent of a very large
bomb strapped to your butt
so this is the brain for the saturn v
rocket
if you look up right here this is
the instrumentation ring and so they had
computers on here
that were digital this right here is the
launch vehicle
digital computer that is it this
right here is a memory module okay
and if you look really really really
close really close
you see those little bitty rings yeah
okay look right here
look at that do you see that
holy smokes so they're just
it looks like zip ties on chicken wire
okay
those are bits those are physical bits
so you see that screen yeah these are
wires that go down to these boards right
here right
yeah on each node you have
an iron ring and depending on how the
iron ring is magnetized that's a one or
a zero
that's how they programmed this computer
seriously so look at this right here so
by hand by hand yes they threaded
these wires through the
i mean who has a steady in it like i
don't even think you could build one of
these today if you wanted to
that's incredible so there's a guy that
worked on this in the 60s here his name
is luke
yeah and uh you get to ask him all of
these questions
fantastic i'm luke talley and at this
time in 1969 i was a senior associate
engineer
at ibm in huntsville so your computer
pointed the rocket
that's right awesome we steered the
rocket that's a memory module
it's a whole memory module yeah you must
have shot somebody to get that
so how valuable is that i don't know i
have no idea you have to go to antique
roadshow this computer controls all the
timing start engine
stop engine fire separation rockets fire
retro rockets all this kind of stuff
it does navigation and guidance you have
stored in the memory of profile at this
point in time i need to be here going
this fast going in this direction
now realize that this is core memory
so you have these magnetic cores you
have the wires feeding through the cores
you push a current down through a wire
all right if you got a wire
if current's going in that direction the
magnetic field is going to be in this
direction if it's going this way it'll
be that way make that a one make that a
zero
there's eight thousand one hundred and
ninety two of those on this plane
all right yeah then there's fourteen of
those planes stack up to make this
module
this module is what you're holding all
this stuff now
the drivers to drive this that's just to
process it
because this is basically an analog
process
right i'm not writing ones and zeros
into a logic gate and storing them that
way
i'm actually having to make magnetize a
core one way or the other
and then i've got to read it and when i
read it i destroy the magnetization so i
have to turn right back around
and write it back in there so that it's
not missing
oh no so there's one of these in this
and then there's one of these now in
each one of these blocks on this wall
over here
got it so so we have 4 8 12 16
000 words of memory another four eight
twelve sixteen thousand words of memory
now when the saturn's flying both of
these memories are executing the same
flight program
completely in parallel that's right and
they're comparing the outputs to make
sure they're getting the same answer
if they were to not get the same answer
go into subroutine and say i'm at this
point in the flight i got these two
numbers what makes the most sense
to keep using use that number and keep
going so your critical parts are triple
redundant than the logic
dual redundant in the memory as i recall
during all the saturn flights we had
like less than 10 miscompared something
like that it was a very small number
when you're building a rocket you have
some important parameters that you have
to monitor
power data bandwidth mass volume you
have to manage these so they don't get
out of control
so you want a reliable system but at
some point you have to make a decision
how redundant is redundant enough
unreliability
that's the key because the more these
things more
cores you add the more of this stuff you
need the more
unreliability you add to your system
because sheer numbers of parts
right luke is about to explain what it
was like to receive data from the saturn
5 via telemetry and then analyze it and
i'm going to let this play out because i
want you to understand how repetitive
and difficult this task was today we
could do this with just a few minutes
and some spreadsheet software
but back in the day they were the
computers like the people
were the computers so i want you to see
it through his eyes through this
historical lens so you understand what
it was like
to analyze the saturn v data so did you
pull the data down why it was flying
things happen too quick in flight too
how do you know you had we get the data
back
and then we analyze that was my job at
ibm as we were
analyzing the flight data to determine
what worked what didn't work
if it didn't work on this flight how do
we fix it on the next flight
and then when you get the nasa
requirements for the next flight make
sure we got everything
in place to do what we are supposed to
do so the data tapes come from all
around the world through goddard space
flight center is responsible for that
so they get us the data and then we
analyze it and determine what happened
something would go wrong in the computer
and it always goes wrong when something
else is messing up the telemetry system
so we would actually get what they call
an octal dump we have this 11 by 17
sheet of paper
10-bit octal numbers so you'd have there
were four characters
like zero to seven sides you go with
octal arithmetic
so you got all these things i think it
was like maybe
40 columns and 30 rows something like
that
so we would get this thing printed out
and all it's just numbers
well the piece we're looking for is at a
particular place down here
well the dropout is where we you know
telemetry dropout so we would actually
get this printed out
11x7 fan fold paper spread it down this
hallway get down on your hands and knees
make a template
cut out you'll have a number of
measurements that'll always be the same
you know
right like a voltage that never changes
yeah so we know what those numbers ought
to be
so we cut the holes out and slide it
down
page by pi oh hey these all look good
okay this frame is probably good
so we go find so many columns so many
rows find the number we want write it
down
so you're looking for one that if it
bungs up something that you know is a
fixed value
then it probably bunged up something
else that's right and if
if the fixed value is okay then
somewhere in there our number is
probably okay and then once you've got
the problematic one i mean is that just
the world's nastiest sudoku puzzle or
well how do you solve that
you may have you may have to do this for
many many many frames then you take it
to your desk
and take those octal numbers convert
them to decimal numbers go to a
calibration
chart and say okay i got this number
yeah go up my chart so that means it's
five degrees centigrade
so you write down five degrees and you
figure out what frame you are that's
about what time it is so
at this time i had five degrees then you
go to the next one now you do this for
about two weeks and finally you got
enough to
plot a graph by hand so you put all
these numbers in and you plot it by hand
and then you say hmm that wasn't a
problem after all oh well here we go
again
so oh boy this is ed hi this is the
headquarters
how are you this is kind of an in the
hand example of the
memory course that you can see woven
into the spread here and then kind of
under the magnification over here
and there's about eight or nine of them
in there so like luke was saying when
you run the current through there it
starts to spin that donut in a
particular direction and that tells you
whether it's the one or the zero
and you're saying they were woven on by
hand it was primarily women that did the
work
um that had basically a bench top so
they would have like textile industry
experience i guess
um or i actually am not certain what
their qualifications were
but they would sit with a benchtop with
this thing mounted in a holder
yeah with copper wire lengths and
tweezers and their fingers and a
lot more patience than i have um to weed
these things through there to make sure
that they went through appropriately no
kinks
no bends that were out of a speck and to
actually make sure that the
little donuts go into a cross you know
the way they should and that was all
uniform so everything would be
predictable behavior incredible too i
just wanted you to hold a physical bit
now you know what that's like yeah yeah
i mean this is this is more than eight
bits so this is i'm holding at least a
bite
think about it that way so when you look
at this what what kind of emotion do you
feel when you when you look at this
luke do you do you are you is it
fondness or is it more just uh
thank goodness i don't have to work on
that bloody thing anymore no i'm going
to
talk to one of my buddies when you go
out the building here get you in the
head
to get this thing yeah no that that's uh
that's a real piece of work you know and
it looks
to people that come in here they say
this this just looks so
much like an antique but again we only
had a few failures
during the whole flight that were
intermittent
we never had a catastrophic failure
people might say antique but
uh i would say handcrafted yes there's a
lot of hand work went into these oh you
can tell i mean
even just even even these are these
they're clearly hand baked
they've got the goop on them because the
big problem with this thing is vibration
though the memory that we were looking
at over there
they test and test and test on that
thing to make sure
that you hadn't got a kink in a wire or
twist because if you do
the vibration is going to cause it to
break those things were made by hand the
ladies actually
wove these things like you're weaving a
piece of claw
pretty amazing oh this is fascinating
thank you very much by the way i want to
say thanks to the sponsor today which is
audible i'm about to recommend
a 13-hour audio book about salt and
you're gonna think i'm crazy but i'm not
because it's amazing
this is a book called salt a world
history by mark kurlansky
and it is amazing like everything from
natron in the egyptian desert
to why civil war battles were fought the
way they were because
there were certain salt works in certain
locations to why
gandhi walked to the ocean and it also
tells you about
like garum in which is a roman sauce
that was like
roman ketchup that we don't know how to
make anymore this audiobook
is amazing and you should listen to it
you can get it by going to audible.com
smarter or texting the word smarter to
500 500
i know it would make more sense to like
recommend an audio book about space
but this is what i'm actually listening
to and it's incredible so
audible.com smarter or text the word
smarter to 500 500
get your first audio book for free plus
two free audible originals
when you try audible for 30 days by
using these links audible.com
smarter you will love this book please
do that that supports smarter every day
when you support smarter every day
it lets me do more videos about the
stuff i love if you want to see more of
this interaction between
linus and luke it's incredible like on
the second channel
there's a 30 minute video of luke going
all the way down the rabbit hole
this guy knows his stuff like i feel
like i know rockets pretty well
linus certainly knows computers but when
we're sitting there it's almost like
luke could just run around both of us go
check that out on the second channel
also
go check out linus's channel up actually
i'll just let linus do an outro himself
go check out linus's channel linus tech
tips
he's talking about what's it called
again the instrument unit uh basically
we talk a little bit about the computer
but destin's got a little more
information on that but
i really love the cooling system on this
thing it's going to blow your guys's
mind
it's awesome so it's at the top of the
rocket because as you've got all three
stages of the saturn v
you need your instrument unit way up
here so you can guide the saturn v
before the apollo computer takes over
but linus talks about details of power
and how that stuff works it's pretty
cool
yeah thanks dude appreciate it guys
thank you
thanks guys thank you
for something it's called space camp
space camp yeah so all those kids are
here to
learn how to be astronauts and fighter
pilots
that's luke no that's luke
yeah no way yeah
on the lefter apparently that's pretty
cool huh
luke talley there it is far left
that's nice it's pretty neat in it